[Music]
hello everyone and welcome to the sixth
episode of ask a physicist I have been a
little recently so this one took a
little longer to make and expected but
enough of it excuses and let's get it on
Chicago cups 1060 asked me what is the
most no gravity on earth would we just
slowly float into outer space
what would we stay on the ground until
we jumped and then float into space well
I thought it was an interesting
hypothetical scenario so so that gives
us a try the ants I'm afraid there is
depending on where you happen to be on
earth
well let's stop on the start as I've
explained before the reason we stick to
the ground is because office of
gravitational pull of the earth the
earth is a very massive object and we
are very close to it hence it exerts on
us a very strong gravitational force
however ZF is also a rotating object it
makes a full rotation about every 24
hours which is why we have night and day
the axis of rotation of Earth goes from
the north to the south pole like this
essentially this means that if you stand
nearly Cueto's you you're being spun
around a distance of 40,000 kilometers
every day now if you've ever been on a
fast carousel or if you ever if you've
ever driven around abandon the road very
quickly you will have noticed that you
always get pushed against your seat or
against the side of the car away from
the center of rotation this effect is
caused by the centripetal force acting
on you because of your motion you see
all objects move at a certain speed
would normally continue to move in a
straight line in order to make something
move in a circle you have to supply a
force to it that pushes it towards the
point you want it to rotate about
so in a cow cell or in a car going or on
the band you get pressed against the
seat or the car door because essentially
your body wants to keep moving in a
straight line so the door or the seat
pushes you in the right direction
towards the point you're taking about so
force your experience and being pushed
against your seat is known as the
centripetal force II the force required
to keep an object moving in a circle
well the same principle applies to us
staying on the ground as we are span
around the earth we essentially want to
keep going in a straight line however
there's no car door keeping us in place
but it is gravity well the magnitude of
the centripetal force on a person on
earth is given by the person's mass
times its velocity due to rotation as
you have squared divided by the radius
of the earth and if you do the maths you
will see that the centripetal force
required to keep you on the Earth's
surface is much smaller since the
gravitational force due to your mass and
so you will stick to the ground and not
float into space normally so that's that
let's see what happens if you magically
switch off gravity well obviously now
the gravitational force that
counteracted that centripetal force due
to our rotation around the earth is gone
and yes we will start flying well of
course to avoid such a fate you could
simply decide to live at the North or
the South Pole here you are simply
rotating around your own axis and you're
not moving at all relative to the earth
and of course there's no centripetal
force or quite to keep you there so when
gravity goes you will just hang there
weightlessly
unless you decide to push yourself away
however we're going to go on you will
actually have many other problems
besides trying to stay on the ground
first of all of the gravity we wouldn't
be pulled towards the Sun anymore so by
the same principle mg over no no I
rotate around
son and will instead move in a straight
line until the Sun is out of sight now
overall the sun's radiation it will be
pretty cold and dark here so you need
some very warm clothes and a torch but
there's more yet you see our atmosphere
the air we breathe and any other gas is
essentially just a huge bunch of
molecules or atoms moving around at high
speeds usually the gas molecules in our
atmosphere just move around bounds of
each other
bounds of the ground or sometimes just
move away from the earth but eventually
gravity slows them down and they drop
back now with gravity gone all these
particles will just shoot off into space
leaving our planet with no atmosphere
and of course living broaden atmosphere
has bad side effects like not being able
to breathe so you'd probably need to
have some airtight chamber with
sufficient oxygen supply to stay in your
existence well this still might not be
enough actually as I've explained before
you have consist of several layers when
we live on the outer crusts which is
only about 30 kilometers thick
the molten mantle is 3,000 kilometers
thick and very hot and then this of
course is a massive core in the middle
which is also half molten and hotter
still now normally gravity holds all
this together but once it is gone the
molten parts of the earth will try to
expand and quite possibly break opens
your crust to do so in other words 0
will explode
oh so well it seems we're much better
with gravity rather than without it but
well everyone I wouldn't worry about it
going away since well gravity has been
on for a very long time and we have no
reason to assume that it would leave us
anytime soon so Chicago cop says no
reason to worry and I hope this answered
your question a more fundamental
question might be what causes gravity
which is a question science yet has to
answer well at the moment we are looking
at string theory and experiments at CERN
to possibly shed some light on the
matter but that's for another time so
this is all for this episode of ask a
physicist thanks for watching if you
have questions yourself on please send
me a message or post a comment and I'll
get back to you as soon as possible and
I hope you see you next time
[Music]